refactor: introduce the configure-biome guide (#811)
biomejs/website: src/content/docs/guides/configure-biome.mdx

---
title: Configure Biome
description: Learn how Biome configuration works.
---

import {FileTree} from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

This guide will help you to understand how to configure Biome.
It explains the structure of a Biome configuration file and how Biome resolves its configuration.
If you are already familiar with the configuration, you may want to take a look at the [configuration reference](/reference/configuration/), which details all the options available.

Biome allows you to customize its behavior using CLI options or a configuration file named `biome.json` or `biome.jsonc`.
We recommend that you create a configuration file for each project.
This ensures that each team member has the same configuration in the CLI and in any editor that allows Biome integration.
Many of the options available in a configuration file are also available in the CLI.

## Configuration file structure

A Biome configuration file is named `biome.json` or `biome.jsonc`.
It is usually placed in your project's root directory, next to your project's `package.json`.

Because Biome is a toolchain, its configuration is organized around the tools it provides.

> At the moment, Biome provides three tools: the formatter, the linter and the import organizer (also called the import sorter).

Reviewer: It's the other way around. We take the name from the LSP, which calls it `organizeImports`. So for us is called import sorter first and foremost.

All of these tools are enabled by default.
You can disable one or several of them using the `<tool>.enabled` field:

```json title="biome.json"
{
  "$schema": "https://biomejs.dev/schemas/1.8.3/schema.json",
  "formatter": {
    "enabled": false
  },
  "linter": {
    "enabled": false
  },
  "organizeImports": {
    "enabled": false
  }
}
```

> Options that apply to any language are placed in the corresponding tool field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Options that apply to more than one language are placed in the corresponding tool field.
```

I suggest this because we have https://biomejs.dev/reference/configuration/#formatterattributeposition, which applies to JSX and HTML

Language-specific options of a tool are placed under a `<language>.<tool>` field.
This also allows overriding general options for a given language.
You can also enable or disable a tool based on the language.
In the following example, we configure the general options `formatter.indentStyle` and `formatter.lineWidth` for all the supported languages.
Also, we set the JavaScript-specific option `quoteStyle` in `javascript.formatter` and we override `formatter.lineWidth`.
We disabled the formatter for JSON files.

```json5 title="biome.jsonc"
{
  "formatter": {
    "indentStyle": "space", // default is `tab`
    "lineWidth": 100 // default is `80`
  },
  "javascript": {
    "formatter": {
      "quoteStyle": "single", // default is `double`
      "lineWidth": 120 // override `formatter.lineWidth`
    }
  },
  "json": {
    "formatter": {
      "enabled": false
    }
  }
}
```

:::note
Biome refers as `javascript` all variants of the JavaScript language.

> This includes TypeScript and JSX.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes TypeScrip, JSX and TSX.
```

I learned that some people think JSX and TSX are two separate languages.

:::

## Configuration file resolution

Biome uses auto discovery to find the nearest configuration file.
It looks in the working directory and in the parent directories until it finds a `biome.json` or a `biome.jsonc` file.
If no configuration is found, then it applies Biome's defaults.
If both `biome.json` and `biome.jsonc` are present in the same folder, the priority will be given to `biome.json`.

Here's an example:

<FileTree>
- app
  - backend
    - biome.json
    - package.json
  - frontend
    - biome.json
    - legacy
      - package.json
    - new
      - package.json
</FileTree>

- Biome commands that run in `app/backend/package.json` will use the configuration file `app/backend/biome.json`;
- Biome commands that run in `app/frontend/legacy/package.json` and `app/frontend/new/package.json`
will use the configuration file `app/frontend/biome.json`;

:::caution
Biome doesn't support nested `biome.json` files, neither in CLI nor in LSP. [Follow and help the support in the related issue](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/2228)
:::

:::note

> Biome commands support using the `--config-path` option.

Reviewer: I think we should mention the env variable `BIOME_CONFIG_PATH` too

## Ignoring files

The first way to control which files and directories are processed by Biome is to list them in the CLI.
In the following command, we format only `file1.js` and all the files in the `src` directory.
The directories are recursively traversed.

```shell
biome format file1.js src/
```

:::caution
Glob patterns used on the command line are not interpreted by Biome.
They are expanded by your shell.
Some shells don't support the recursive glob `**`.
:::

The Biome configuration file can be used to refine which files are processed.
You can explicitly list the files to be processed using `include` and the files not to be processed using `ignore`.
`include` and `ignore` accepts globs patterns such as `src/**/*.js`.
See the related section for which glob syntaxes are supported.
`include` is always applied first before applying `ignore`.
This allows you to include some files and to ignore some of the file you included.

:::note
`include` and `ignore` have a slightly different semantics.
`ignore` applies to both regular files and folders,
while `include` is only tested on regular files.

> This means that if you want to prevent Biome from traversing a folder,

Reviewer: Are you sure this is true? I used `include` for folders, and it worked

Author: I copied this from the old docs. Maybe it is badly phrased. It means to say that `include` doesn't prevent Biome of traversing a folder that is not covered by `include`.
For example, if `include` contains only `src`, Biome will still visit `test`.

Author: This should be fixed :)

you have to add the folder to `ignore`.

> This is a current limitation that we will fix in a future release.

Reviewer: To remove. No need to explain future stuff, because we don't know when it will change and how. And it forces us to come back here and remove it.

A glob pattern specifies a set of filenames.
Biome supports the following globs:

- `*` matches zero or more characters. It cannot match the path separator `/`.
- `**` recursively matches directories and files.
  This sequence **must** form a single path component,
  so both `**a` and `b**` are invalid and will result in an error.
  A sequence of more than two consecutive `*` characters is also invalid.
- `[...]` matches any character inside the brackets.
  Ranges of characters can also be specified, as ordered by Unicode, so e.g.
  `[0-9]` specifies any character between 0 and 9 inclusive.
- `[!...]` is the negation of `[...]`, i.e. it matches any characters **not** in the brackets.

Some examples:

- `dist/**` matches the dist directory and all files in this directory.
- `**/test/**` matches all files under any directory named `test`, regardless of where they are. E.g. `dist/test`, `src/test`.
- `**/*.js` matches all files ending with the extension `.js` in all directories.

Biome uses a glob library that treats all globs as having a `**/` prefix.
This means that `src/**/*.js` and `**/src/**/*.js` are treated as identical.
They match both `src/file.js` and `test/src/file.js`.

> This is something we plan to fix in Biome **v2.0.0**, as it will be a breaking change.

Reviewer: There's no need to mention "future" plans inside docs:
- it forces us to remember to remove this line when there's a new release
- it "expires" and confuses people
- feels like a `TODO`

When the logic changes, we change the explanation accordingly.
